Reword and rearrange Native AOT docs (#36885)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/deploying/native-aot/diagnostics.md

---
title: Diagnostics and instrumentation
description: Learn about diagnostics in native AOT applications
author: lakshanf
ms.author: lakshanf
ms.date: 08/07/2023
---

# Diagnostics and instrumentation

> Native AOT shares some, but not all, diagnostics and instrumentation capabilities with CoreCLR. Because of CoreCLR's rich selection of diagnostic utilities, it will sometimes be appropriate to diagnose and debug problems in CoreCLR. Apps which are trim-compatible should not have behavioral differences, so investigations often apply to both runtimes. Nonetheless, some information can only be gathered after publishing, so Native AOT also provides post-publish diagnostic tooling.

Author: Isn't it a proper noun? The title of a feature?

I looked and we capitalize the "Native" in .NET Native. I think we should do the same here. I'd be happy to update the rest of the file.

> Native AOT shares some, but not all, diagnostics and instrumentation capabilities with CoreCLR. Because of CoreCLR's rich selection of diagnostic utilities, it will sometimes be appropriate to diagnose and debug problems in CoreCLR. Apps which are trim-compatible should not have behavioral differences, so investigations often apply to both runtimes. Nonetheless, some information can only be gathered after publishing, so Native AOT also provides post-publish diagnostic tooling.

Author: I don't think it is descriptive though -- didn't we indicate that "native" should not be translated into the target language during localization? That would indicate to me that it's not descriptive, it's part of the name of the feature.

> Native AOT shares some, but not all, diagnostics and instrumentation capabilities with CoreCLR. Because of CoreCLR's rich selection of diagnostic utilities, it will sometimes be appropriate to diagnose and debug problems in CoreCLR. Apps which are trim-compatible should not have behavioral differences, so investigations often apply to both runtimes. Nonetheless, some information can only be gathered after publishing, so Native AOT also provides post-publish diagnostic tooling.

Reviewer: As long as we are consistent throughout all the public docs, I don't feel too strongly either way and will defer to what other folks think.

> Native AOT shares some, but not all, diagnostics and instrumentation capabilities with CoreCLR. Because of CoreCLR's rich selection of diagnostic utilities, it will sometimes be appropriate to diagnose and debug problems in CoreCLR. Apps which are trim-compatible should not have behavioral differences, so investigations often apply to both runtimes. Nonetheless, some information can only be gathered after publishing, so Native AOT also provides post-publish diagnostic tooling.

Author: Sounds good, I'll update the glossary to capitalize Native AOT

> Native AOT shares some, but not all, diagnostics and instrumentation capabilities with CoreCLR. Because of CoreCLR's rich selection of diagnostic utilities, it will sometimes be appropriate to diagnose and debug problems in CoreCLR. Apps which are trim-compatible should not have behavioral differences, so investigations often apply to both runtimes. Nonetheless, some information can only be gathered after publishing, so Native AOT also provides post-publish diagnostic tooling.

Author: I think it's Native AOT (with a space)

## .NET 8 native AOT diagnostic support

The following table summarizes diagnostic features supported for native AOT deployments:

> | Feature | Fully supported | Partially supported | Not supported |

Reviewer 2: It would be good to match the feature name in the table with the description headers below for ease of readability. That would require the non-table items to be grouped under a different header.

Author: Should be fixed now.

After publishing, Native AOT applications are true native binaries. The managed debugger will not work on them. However, the Native AOT compiler generates fully native executable files that can be debugged by native debuggers on your platform of choice (e.g. WinDbg or Visual Studio on Windows, and gdb or lldb on Unix-like systems).

The NativeAOT compiler generates information about line numbers, types, locals and parameters. The native debugger will let you inspect stack trace and variables, step into/over source lines, or set line breakpoints.

To debug managed exceptions, set a breakpoint on the `RhThrowEx` method -- this method is called whenever a managed exception is thrown.

Collecting a [dump](../../diagnostics/dumps.md) file for a native AOT application involves some manual steps in .NET 8.

### Visual Studio-specific notes

> You can launch a NativeAOT-compiled executable under the VS debugger by opening it in the Visual Studio IDE. In the `File` menu, choose `Open Project/Solution...` and navigate to the native executable. You can set breakpoints as needed. To start debugging the EXE, choose the `Start Debugging` option from the Debug menu.

Reviewer: Link to https://learn.microsoft.com/visualstudio/debugger/how-to-debug-an-executable-not-part-of-a-visual-studio-solution?

To set a breakpoint that breaks whenever an exception is thrown, choose the Breakpoints option from the `Debug -> Windows` menu. In the new window, select `New -> Function` breakpoint. Specify `RhThrowEx` as the Function Name and leave the Language option at "All Languages" (do not select C#).

> To see what exception was thrown, start debugging (`Debug -> Start Debugging` or `F5`), open the Watch window (`Debug -> Windows -> Watch`) and add following expression as one of the watches: `(S_P_CoreLib_System_Exception*)@rcx`. This leverages the fact that at the time `RhThrowEx` is called, the x64 CPU register RCX contains the thrown exception. You can also paste the expression into the Immediate Window; the syntax is the same as for watches.

Reviewer: Can this be generalized to 'inspecting exceptions' / non-VS (and maybe use VS as an example)? I think this is useful information for any debugging, but I would have just skipped over the 'Visual Studio-specific notes' if I'm not using VS.

Author: There's a comment about this above ("set a breakpoint on the `RhThrowEx` method). Is there anything more to add that's generalizable to all debuggers?

Reviewer: I was thinking of how it points out the type `S_P_CoreLib_System_Exception*` and the rcx (or x0) register.

### Importance of the symbol file

> In native AOT, symbol-file-dependent diagnostics (such as debugging [PerfView](https://github.com/microsoft/perfview) callstacks) don't work at all unless the diagnostic tool has access to the monolithic PDB that was generated when the application was compiled. In .NET, symbol-file-dependent diagnostics generally work just fine, or even great, even if the diagnostic tool has no access to any PDBs that were generated when the application was compiled. That is, symbols for the .NET runtime and the .NET libraries can be pulled from symbol servers, and diagnostic tools can still show function names and accurate call stacks even without access to the compile-time PDBs.

Author: Let me try to cleanup this paragraph.

> In native AOT, symbol-file-dependent diagnostics (such as debugging [PerfView](https://github.com/microsoft/perfview) callstacks) don't work at all unless the diagnostic tool has access to the monolithic PDB that was generated when the application was compiled. In .NET, symbol-file-dependent diagnostics generally work just fine, or even great, even if the diagnostic tool has no access to any PDBs that were generated when the application was compiled. That is, symbols for the .NET runtime and the .NET libraries can be pulled from symbol servers, and diagnostic tools can still show function names and accurate call stacks even without access to the compile-time PDBs.

Reviewer: I think this should also link to the 'Native debug information' section in the overview (and probably say 'symbol file' or 'debug information file' instead of 'monolithic PDB')

> In native AOT, symbol-file-dependent diagnostics (such as debugging [PerfView](https://github.com/microsoft/perfview) callstacks) don't work at all unless the diagnostic tool has access to the monolithic PDB that was generated when the application was compiled. In .NET, symbol-file-dependent diagnostics generally work just fine, or even great, even if the diagnostic tool has no access to any PDBs that were generated when the application was compiled. That is, symbols for the .NET runtime and the .NET libraries can be pulled from symbol servers, and diagnostic tools can still show function names and accurate call stacks even without access to the compile-time PDBs.

Author: This is nested inside the "Native debugging information" section. Are you thinking there should be a link to the top of the section?

> In native AOT, symbol-file-dependent diagnostics (such as debugging [PerfView](https://github.com/microsoft/perfview) callstacks) don't work at all unless the diagnostic tool has access to the monolithic PDB that was generated when the application was compiled. In .NET, symbol-file-dependent diagnostics generally work just fine, or even great, even if the diagnostic tool has no access to any PDBs that were generated when the application was compiled. That is, symbols for the .NET runtime and the .NET libraries can be pulled from symbol servers, and diagnostic tools can still show function names and accurate call stacks even without access to the compile-time PDBs.

Reviewer: Sorry that was really ambiguous - this is the page/section I was referring to: https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/core/deploying/native-aot#native-debug-information

---
title: Diagnostics and instrumentation
description: Learn about diagnostics in Native AOT applications
author: lakshanf
ms.author: lakshanf
ms.date: 08/07/2023
---

# Diagnostics and instrumentation

> Native AOT shares some, but not all, diagnostics and instrumentation capabilities with CoreCLR. Because of CoreCLR's rich selection of diagnostic utilities, it will sometimes be appropriate to diagnose and debug problems in CoreCLR. Apps which are [trim-compatible](../trimming/prepare-libraries-for-trimming.md) should not have behavioral differences, so investigations often apply to both runtimes. Nonetheless, some information can only be gathered after publishing, so Native AOT also provides post-publish diagnostic tooling.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Native AOT shares some, but not all, diagnostics and instrumentation capabilities with CoreCLR. Because of CoreCLR's rich selection of diagnostic utilities, it's sometimes appropriate to diagnose and debug problems in CoreCLR. Apps that are [trim-compatible](../trimming/prepare-libraries-for-trimming.md) should not have behavioral differences, so investigations often apply to both runtimes. Nonetheless, some information can only be gathered after publishing, so Native AOT also provides post-publish diagnostic tooling.
```

## .NET 8 Native AOT diagnostic support

The following table summarizes diagnostic features supported for Native AOT deployments:

| Feature | Fully supported | Partially supported | Not supported |
| - | - | - | - |
| [Observability and telemetry](#observability-and-telemetry) | | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Partially supported</span> | |
| [Development-time diagnostics](#development-time-diagnostics) | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Fully supported</span> | | |
| [Native debugging](#native-debugging) | | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Partially supported</span> | |
| [CPU Profiling](#cpu-profiling) | | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Partially supported</span> | |
| [Heap analysis](#heap-analysis) | | | <span aria-hidden="true">❌</span><span class="visually-hidden">Not supported</span> |

## Observability and telemetry

> As of .NET 8, the Native AOT runtime supports [EventPipe](../../diagnostics/eventpipe.md), which is the base layer used by many logging and tracing libraries. You can interface with EventPipe directly through APIs like `EventSource.WriteEvent` or you can use libraries built on top, like [OpenTelemetry](../../diagnostics/observability-with-otel.md). EventPipe support also allows .NET diagnostic tools like [dotnet-trace](../../diagnostics/dotnet-trace.md), [dotnet-counter](../../diagnostics/dotnet-counters.md), and [dotnet-monitor](../../diagnostics/dotnet-monitor.md), to work seamlessly with Native AOT or CoreCLR applications. EventPipe is an optional component in Native AOT. To include EventPipe support, set the `EventSourceSupport` MSBuild property to `true`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As of .NET 8, the Native AOT runtime supports [EventPipe](../../diagnostics/eventpipe.md), which is the base layer used by many logging and tracing libraries. You can interface with EventPipe directly through APIs like `EventSource.WriteEvent` or you can use libraries built on top, like [OpenTelemetry](../../diagnostics/observability-with-otel.md). EventPipe support also allows .NET diagnostic tools like [dotnet-trace](../../diagnostics/dotnet-trace.md), [dotnet-counter](../../diagnostics/dotnet-counters.md), and [dotnet-monitor](../../diagnostics/dotnet-monitor.md) to work seamlessly with Native AOT or CoreCLR applications. EventPipe is an optional component in Native AOT. To include EventPipe support, set the `EventSourceSupport` MSBuild property to `true`.
```

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
    <EventSourceSupport>true</EventSourceSupport>
</PropertyGroup>
```

Native AOT provides partial support for some [well-known event providers](../../diagnostics/well-known-event-providers.md). Not all [runtime events](../../../fundamentals/diagnostics/runtime-events.md) are supported in Native AOT.

## Development-time diagnostics

> The .NET CLI tooling (`dotnet` SDK) and Visual studio offer separate commands for `build` and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The .NET CLI tooling (`dotnet` SDK) and Visual Studio offer separate commands for `build` and
```

> `publish`. `build` (or `Start` in Visual Studio) will use CoreCLR. Only `publish` will create a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`publish`. `build` (or `Start` in Visual Studio) uses CoreCLR. Only `publish` creates a
```

Native AOT application.  Publishing your app as Native AOT produces an app that has been

> ahead-of-time (AOT) compiled to native code. As mentioned above, this means that not all diagnostic

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ahead-of-time (AOT) compiled to native code. As mentioned previously, this means that not all diagnostic
```

tools will work seamlessly with published Native AOT applications in .NET 8. However, all .NET
diagnostic tools are available for developers during the application building stage. We recommend

> developing, debugging, and testing the applications as usual and publish the working app with native

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
developing, debugging, and testing the applications as usual and publishing the working app with Native
```

AOT as one of the last steps.

## Native debugging

> When running your app during development, like inside Visual Studio, or with `dotnet run`, `dotnet build`, or `dotnet test`, applications will run on CoreCLR by default. However, as long as `PublishAot` is present in the project file the behavior should be the same between CoreCLR and Native AOT. This allows you to use the standard Visual Studio managed debugging engine for development and testing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When your run your app during development, like inside Visual Studio, or with `dotnet run`, `dotnet build`, or `dotnet test`, it runs on CoreCLR by default. However, if `PublishAot` is present in the project file, the behavior should be the same between CoreCLR and Native AOT. This allows you to use the standard Visual Studio managed debugging engine for development and testing.
```

To debug managed exceptions, set a breakpoint on the `RhThrowEx` method -- this method is called whenever a managed exception is thrown. The exception is stored in the `rcx` or `x0` register. If your debugger supports viewing C++ objects, you can cast
the register to `S_P_CoreLib_System_Exception*` to see more information about the exception.

Collecting a [dump](../../diagnostics/dumps.md) file for a Native AOT application involves some manual steps in .NET 8.

### Visual Studio-specific notes

You can launch a NativeAOT-compiled executable under the VS debugger by opening it in the Visual Studio IDE. You will need to [open the executable itself in Visual Studio](https://learn.microsoft.com/visualstudio/debugger/how-to-debug-an-executable-not-part-of-a-visual-studio-solution).

To set a breakpoint that breaks whenever an exception is thrown, choose the Breakpoints option from the `Debug -> Windows` menu. In the new window, select `New -> Function` breakpoint. Specify `RhThrowEx` as the Function Name and leave the Language option at "All Languages" (do not select C#).

> To see what exception was thrown, start debugging (`Debug -> Start Debugging` or `F5`), open the Watch window (`Debug -> Windows -> Watch`) and add following expression as one of the watches: `(S_P_CoreLib_System_Exception*)@rcx`. This leverages the fact that at the time `RhThrowEx` is called, the x64 CPU register RCX contains the thrown exception. You can also paste the expression into the Immediate Window; the syntax is the same as for watches.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To see what exception was thrown, start debugging (**Debug > Start Debugging** or <kbd>F5</kbd>), open the Watch window (**Debug > Windows > Watch**), and add following expression as one of the watches: `(S_P_CoreLib_System_Exception*)@rcx`. This mechanism leverages the fact that at the time `RhThrowEx` is called, the x64 CPU register RCX contains the thrown exception. You can also paste the expression into the Immediate window; the syntax is the same as for watches.
```
